- Start Date: 2020-10-15
- Status: Done

# Summary

Some of Neptune Web components have default and/or constant messages which needs to be localised.

This RFC describes a proposal using [react-intl](https://formatjs.io/docs/react-intl) library and Crowdin along with a custom context provider. This solution will be compatible with React or React + Angular hybrid apps/libraries it works as for client side as for server-side rendering.

# Motivation

Some of neptune web components require translations for 'default text' where we define 'default text' as:
 - text that is not likely to be changed.
 - text that we are able to anticipate.
 - optional text that has a default value.

A few examples of 'default text' that need to be translated:
- `aria-label` in `CloseButton` ("Close");
- `next` and `previous` button text in  `Pagination` component ("Previous" and "Next").
- default messages in `Upload` component.
- validation messages in `Field`.

# Technical Details

This RFC suggests to use:

react-intl as API for managing translations inside components,
and it's tools like [babel-plugin-react-intl](https://formatjs.io/docs/tooling/babel-plugin/) for transpiling
as well as [@formatjs/cli](https://formatjs.io/docs/getting-started/message-extraction) for message extraction.

We choose react-intl because it's based on ECMAScript Internationalization API - [`Intl`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Intl) which already built into browsers,
the library is widely used thus it has good ecosystem of plugins (e.g for babel or ESLint) and community of maintainers/contributors to continue evolve and improve it.

And a custom context provider that we called `Provider`. It's main duty is to initialize `react-intl` context provider ([`RawIntlProvider`](https://formatjs.io/docs/react-intl/components/#rawintlprovider)) on the consumer side and dynamically load (`import()`) translations file for specified language via prop on demand, this will save us lot of bytes in end bundle as only one locale is bundled.

Note, `Provider` can also be nested inside other providers of other translations libraries/frameworks.

# Usage examples

## Neptune Web usage

```js
// Define messages in default English language in dedicated `.messages.js` file next to the component
import { defineMessages } from 'react-intl';

export default defineMessages({
  ariaLabel: {
    defaultMessage: 'Close',
  },
  defaultChildrenPrefix: {
    defaultMessage: 'Demo',
  }
});

// in component file
import { useIntl, FormattedMessage } from 'react-intl';
import messages from './SomeComponent.messages';

export const SomeComponent = ({ children, ... }) => {
  // Once the component is wrapped in RawIntlProvider, via Provider,
  // it can access the `intl` object via the `useIntl` hook.
  const intl = useIntl();
  return (
    <button
      aria-label={intl.formatMessage(messages.ariaLabel)}
      ...
    >
      <FormattedMessage {...messages.defaultChildrenPrefix} />{' '}{children}
    </button>
  );
};
```

## Consumers app usage

Consumers have to wrap Neptune components in the `Provider`. Usually this should be done once at root level component.

```js
class App {
  render() {
    return (
      <Provider locale={'en'}>
        <head>
          <title>...</title>
        </head>
        ...
      </Provider>
    );
  }
}
```

## Playground usage

For example if you are using Storybook as playground it is necessary to setup the env just adding a decorator that wraps your story with the provider.

```js
// This example with Storybook v5
addDecorator(...);
addDecorator((storyFn) => <Provider locale="en">{storyFn()}</Provider>);
```

# Crowdin integration

Pretty regular setup, Crowdin integrated with Github, it watches for all branches,
so after you push new/updated messages and as soon as translations are ready you should receive a PR (where base branch will be you PR branch) with translated messages.

# Supported Languages

- German (de)
- UK English (en)
- US English (en-US)
- Spanish (es)
- French (fr)
- Hungarian (hu)
- Italian (it)
- Japanese (ja)
- Polish (pl)
- Brazilian Portuguese (pt)
- Romanian (ro)
- Russian (ru)
- Turkish (tr)
- Hong Kong Chinese (hk)

# Considerations

- We did consider implementing approach that is described in react-intl docs - [Distributing i18n-friendly libraries](https://formatjs.io/docs/guides/distribute-libraries/), but we found it not so suitable for us as it forces consumer applications use react-intl with some extra configs on consumer side.
